Tbkka lifetime dependency (#2305)
apple/swift-evolution: proposals/NNNN-lifetime-dependency.md

parse(span) // ✅ Safe: still within 'span's access on 'a'
a[i] = ...
parse(span) // 🛑 Error: simultaneous access of 'a'
```

Here, `a1.span()` initiates a 'read' access on `a1`. The first call to `parse(span)` safely extends that read access. The read cannot extend to the second call because a mutation of `a1` occurs before it.

#### Dependence reassignment

We've described how a mutable variable can be the source of a lifetime dependence. Now let's look at nonescapable mutable variables. Being nonescapable means they depend on another lifetime. Being mutable means that dependence may change during reassignment. Reassigning a nonescapable 'inout' sets its lifetime dependence from that point on, up to either the end of the variable's lifetime or its next subsequent reassignment.

```swift
func reassign(_ span: inout Span<Int>) {
  let a: ContiguousArray<Int> = ...
  span = a.span() // 🛑 Error: 'span' escapes the scope of 'a'
}
```

#### Reassignment with argument dependence

If a function takes a nonescapable 'inout' argument, it may only reassign that argument if it is marked dependent on another function argument that provies the source of the dependence.

```swift

> func reassignWithArgDependence(_ span: dependsOn(arg) inout ContiguousArray<Int>, _ arg: ContiguousArray<Int>) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
func reassignWithArgDependence(_ span: dependsOn(arg) inout Span<Int>, _ arg: ContiguousArray<Int>) {
```

Here's one way such a value might be produced:

```swift
func mutatingBufferReference(to: inout Array, count: Int) -> @dependsOn(to) MutatingBufferReference<Element> {
  ... construct a MutatingBufferReference ...
}
```

We’ve written this example as a free function rather than as a method to show how this annotation syntax can be used to express constraints that apply to a particular argument.
The `@dependsOn(to)` annotation indicates that the returned value depends on the argument named `to`.
Because `count` is not mentioned in the lifetime dependency, that argument does not participate.
Similar to the previous example:

* The array will not be destroyed until after the `MutatingBufferReference<Element>` is destroyed.
* No other read or write access to the array will be allowed for as long as the returned value exists.

In both this and the previous case, the lifetime of the return value is "scoped" to the lifetime of the original value.
Because lifetime dependencies can only be attached to `~Escapable` values, types that contain pointers will generally need to be `~Escapable` in order to provide safe semantics.

> As a result, **scoped lifetime dependencies** are the common case whenever an `Escapable` value (such as an Array or similar container) is providing a `~Escapable` value (such as the `BufferReference` or `MutatingBufferReference` in these examples).

Reviewer 2: **scoped lifetime dependencies** are the common case -> **scoped lifetime dependencies** are the only legal  case

Author: Changed.

* A `consuming` parameter-convention is illegal, since that ends the lifetime of the argument immediately.

If the `ArgType` is `~Escapable`, then it can have a pre-existing lifetime dependency.
In this case, the semantics of `@dependsOn()` are slightly different:
* A `consuming` parameter-convention will copy the lifetime dependency from the argument to the result
* A `borrowing` or `inout` parameter-convention can either copy the lifetime dependency or create a new scoped lifetime dependency.
  In this case, for reasons explained earlier, we default to copying the lifetime dependency.
  If a scoped lifetime dependency is needed, it can be explicitly requested by adding the `scoped` keyword:
  
```swift
func f(arg: borrowing ArgType) -> @dependsOn(scoped arg) ResultType
```

**Methods:** Similar rules apply to `self` lifetime dependencies on methods.
Given a method of this form:

```swift
<mutation-modifier> func method(... args ...) -> @dependsOn(self) ResultType
```

The behavior depends as above on the mutation-modifier and whether the defining type is `Escapable` or `~Escapable`.

> **Initializers:** An initializer can define a lifetime dependency on one of its arguments.

Reviewer 2: on one of its arguments -> on any of its arguments

Author: Changed.

In this case, we use the same rules same as for “Functions” above
by using the convention that initializers can be viewed as functions that return `Self`:

```swift
init(arg: <parameter-convention> ArgType) -> @dependsOn(arg) Self
```

### Implicit Lifetime Dependencies

The syntax above allows developers to explicitly annotate lifetime dependencies in their code.
But because the possibilities are limited, we can usually allow the compiler to infer a suitable dependency.
The detailed rules are below, but generally we require that the return type be `~Escapable` and that there be one “obvious” source for the dependency.

In particular, we can infer a lifetime dependency on `self` for any method that returns a `~Escapable` type.
As above, the details vary depending on whether `self` is `Escapable` or `~Escapable`:

```swift
struct NonescapableType: ~Escapable { ... }
struct EscStruct {

>   func f1(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType

Reviewer 2: We don't infer when mutation modifier is absent

Author: Is there a technical concern?  Or is this just how the current implementation works?

I discussed this with @atrick and I thought we concluded it would be reasonable to accept this without an explicit mutation modifier.

Reviewer 2: As per latest on this, I'll update the implementation

  borrowing func f2(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType
  mutating func f3(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType

  // Note: no lifetime dependency is inferred for a consuming method
  // on an `Escapable` type, since there is no legal option
  consuming func f4(...) -> NonescapableType
}

struct NEStruct: ~Escapable {

>   func f1(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType

Reviewer 2: We don't infer when mutation modifier is absent

Author: Ditto.

  borrowing func f2(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType
  mutating func f3(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType

  // Note: A copy lifetime dependency is legal here
  consuming func f4(...) -> /* @dependsOn(self) */ NonescapableType
}
```

For free or static functions or initializers, we can infer a lifetime dependency when the return value is `~Escapable` and there is only one obvious argument that can serve as the source of the dependency.
For example:

```swift
struct NEType: ~Escapable { ... }

// If there is only one argument with an explicit parameter convention:
func f(..., arg1: borrowing Type1, ...) -> /* @dependsOn(arg1) */ NEType

// Or there is only one argument that is `~Escapable`:

> func g(..., arg2: NEType, ...) -> /* @dependsOn(arg2) */ NEType

Reviewer 2: We don't infer when mutation modifier is absent. arg2 doesn't have one.

Author: @atrick and I discussed permitting this as long as:
* the argument was nonescapable, AND
* the return type was nonescapable

Reviewer 2: This is how it's implemented right now. 

I thought we decided not to rely on default ownership atm. @atrick

# Compile-time Lifetime Dependency Annotations

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-filename.md)
* Authors: [Andrew Trick](https://github.com/atrick), [Meghana Gupta](https://github.com/meg-gupta), [Tim Kientzle](https://github.com/tbkka)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting implementation**
* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-non-escapable-types-and-lifetime-dependency/69865))

## Introduction

> We would like to propose extensions to Swift's function-declaration syntax that allow authors to specify lifetime dependencies between the return value and one or more of the arguments.

Author: Done.

These would also be useable with methods that wish to declare a dependency on `self`.
To reduce the burden of manually adding such annotations, we also propose inferring lifetime dependencies in certain common cases without requiring any additional annotations.

> This is a key requirement for the `BufferView` type being discussed elsewhere, and is closely related to the proposal for `~Escapable` types.

Author: Done.

#### See Also

* **TODO**: **** Forum thread discussing this proposal
* [Forum discussion of BufferView language requirements](https://forums.swift.org/t/roadmap-language-support-for-bufferview)
* [Proposed Vision document for BufferView language requirements (includes description of ~Escapable)](https://github.com/atrick/swift-evolution/blob/fd63292839808423a5062499f588f557000c5d15/visions/language-support-for-BufferView.md#non-escaping-bufferview) 

> 

Author: Done.

Consider a hypothetical `BufferReference` type that is similar to the standard library `UnsafeBufferPointer` or the `BufferView` type that is being proposed for inclusion in the standard library.
It simply holds a pointer and size and can be used to access data stored in a contiguous block of memory.
(We are not proposing this type; it is shown here merely for illustrative purposes.)

```
struct BufferReference<T>: ~Escapable {
  private var base: UnsafePointer<T>
  private var count: Int
}
```

Because this type is marked `~Escapable`, any function that returns this type must specify a lifetime constraint on the return value, using one of the methods described in the following sections.
In the most common cases, these constraints can be inferred automatically.
However, to make the semantics clearer, we’ll begin by describing how one can explicitly specify a lifetime constraint in cases where the default inference rules do not apply.

**Note**: A full proposal for `~Escapable` will be submitted elsewhere.
The above is intended to cover just the minimal features of `~Escapable` required by this proposal.

### Explicit Lifetime Dependency Annotations

> We propose new return value annotations to explicitly describe lifetime dependencies.

Author: Done.

let ref2 = ref1.drop(4) // ref2 also cannot outlive a
```

Note that in `ref1.drop(4)`, the lifetime of `ref2` does not depend on `ref1`.
Rather, `ref2` has inherited `ref1`’s dependency on the lifetime of `a`.

#### `copy(self)`  or  `copy(arg)`

A similar concern arises even when the source is not being consumed.

```
extension BufferReference {
  func dropping(first: Int) -> copy(self) BufferReference<Element> { ... }
}
```

As with the `consume(self)` example above, the new `BufferReference` will inherit the lifetime of the original.

The annotations can be combined in various ways to express complex lifetime interactions between the return value and the arguments:

```
func complexView(data: Array<Item>, statistics: Array<Statistics>, other: Int)
     -> borrow(data) mutate(statistics) ComplexReferenceType
{ ... }
```

#### Allowed Lifetime Dependencies

Only certain types of lifetime dependencies make sense, depending on the type of argument.
The syntax is somewhat different for functions and methods, though the basic rules are essentially the same.

**Functions:** A function with a lifetime dependency annotation generally takes this form:

```

> func f(arg: <parameter-convention> ArgType) -> <lifetime-type>(arg) ResultType

Author: I mention the possibility of multiple lifetime modifiers in the previous paragraph.  I also explicitly permit that in the formal grammar.  I've instead modified the introductory sentence here to say "A simple function with ..." to call out that this is a basic outline.

Changed `lifetime-type` here (and elsewhere) to `lifetime-kind` and resolved several other inconsistencies in the formal grammar.

For example:

```
struct Type1: ~Copyable /* Or: ~Escapable */ /* Or: ~Copyable & ~Escapable */
struct Type2: ~Escapable { ... }
func f(..., arg1: borrowing Type1, ...) -> /* borrow(arg1) */ Type2
func f(..., arg1: consuming Type1, ...) -> /* consume(arg1) */ Type2
func f(..., arg1: inout Type1, ...) -> /* mutate(arg1) */ Type2
```

We expect these implicit inferences to cover most cases, with the explicit form only occasionally being necessary in practice.

## Detailed design

### Grammar

This new syntax adds an optional lifetime modifier just before the return type.
This modifies *function-result* in the Swift grammar as follows:

>
> *function-signature* → *parameter-clause* **`async`***?* **`throws`***?* *function-result**?* \
> *function-signature* → *parameter-clause* **`async`***?* **`rethrows`** *function-result**?* \
> *function-result* → **`->`** *attributes**?* *lifetime-modifiers**?* *type*
> *lifetime-modifiers* **`->`** *lifetime-modifier* *lifetime-modifiers**?*
> *lifetime-modifier* **`->`** *lifetime-modifier-type* **`(`** **`self`** `**)**` \

> > *lifetime-modifier* **`->`** *lifetime-modifier-type* **`(`** *external-parameter-name* `**)**` \

Author: First, can you confirm that the current implementation uses the _internal_ name?

As for terminology, I'm trying to follow the TSPL, which uses two different approaches.  This is the general description used in the Language Reference:
```
<#argument label#> <#parameter name#>: <#parameter type#>
_ <#parameter name#>: <#parameter type#>
```

But the formal grammar uses this:
```
parameter → external-parameter-name? local-parameter-name parameter-type-annotation
```

> > *lifetime-modifier* **`->`** *lifetime-modifier-type* **`(`** *external-parameter-name* `**)**` \

Reviewer 2: Yes the implementation uses the _internal_ name which I keep referring to as parameter name.

> > *lifetime-modifier* **`->`** *lifetime-modifier-type* **`(`** *parameter-index* `**)**` 

Author: Moved this to a "Future Direction" possibility.

> *lifetime-modifier-type* **`->`** **`copy`** | **`borrow`** | **`mutate`** | **`consume`**
>

Here, the argument to the lifetime modifier must be one of the following:

* *local-parameter-name:* the local name of one of the function parameters,
* *parameter-index:* a numeric index of one of the parameters in the *parameter-clause* (the first parameter is number zero), or
* the token **`self`**.

Additionally, the argument referred to by the *external-parameter-name* or *parameter-index* must have an explicit *parameter-modifier* of `inout`, `borrowing`, or `consuming`.
If the *lifetime-modifier* is the token `**self**`**,** then the method must have a *mutation-modifier* of `mutating`, `borrowing`, or `consuming`.

#### Initializers

Initializers can have arguments, and there are cases where users will want to specify a lifetime dependency between one or more arguments and the constructed value.
We propose allowing initializers to write out an explicit return clause for this case:

```
struct S {
  init(arg1: Type1) -> borrow(arg1) Self
}
```

> This syntax will be rejected if the return type is not exactly the token `Self`.

Author: Good catch!  I presume the syntax there would be the following?
```swift
struct S {
  init(arg2: Type2)? -> borrow(arg2) Self?
}

> This syntax will be rejected if the return type is not exactly the token `Self`.

Reviewer 2: It would be like:
```
struct S {
  init?(arg2: borrowing Type2) -> borrow(arg2) Self?
}
```

> This syntax will be rejected if the return type is not exactly the token `Self`.

Author: Of course.  Thanks!

* the return type is `~Escapable`,
* there is exactly one argument that is either `~Copyable` or `~Escapable`
* that argument has an explicit `borrowing`, `consuming`, or `inout` convention specified

In this case, the compiler will infer:

* a `borrow` lifetime dependency for a function whose only `~Escapable` or `~Copyable` argument is `borrowing` 
* a `mutate` lifetime dependency for a function whose only `~Escapable` or `~Copyable` argument is `inout`
* a `consume` lifetime dependency for a function whose only `~Escapable` or `~Copyable` argument is `consuming`

**In no other case** will a function, method, or initializer implicitly gain a lifetime dependency.
If a function, method, or initializer has a `~Escapable` return type, does not have an explicit lifetime dependency annotation, and does not fall into one of the cases above, then that will be a compile-time error.

### Semantics

The syntax above declares a lifetime dependency between the return value of a function or method and a function argument, method argument, or `self`.

> If the `lifetime-modifier` (either specified or inferred) is `borrow` or `mutate`, then we can refer to the argument or `self` as the *source* of the dependency, and the return value then has respectively a *borrow* *lifetime dependency* or a *mutate lifetime dependency* ** on the source.

Author: Done.  There was some accompanying inconsistency in the grammar rules that I think I've also cleaned up.

# Compile-time Lifetime Dependency Annotations

* Proposal: [SE-NNNN](NNNN-filename.md)
* Authors: [Andrew Trick](https://github.com/atrick), [Meghana Gupta](https://github.com/meg-gupta), [Tim Kientzle](https://github.com/tbkka)
* Review Manager: TBD
* Status: **Awaiting implementation**
* Review: ([pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-non-escapable-types-and-lifetime-dependency/69865))

## Introduction

We would like to propose extensions to Swift's function-declaration syntax that allow authors to specify lifetime dependencies between the return value and one or more of the parameters.
These would also be useable with methods that wish to declare a dependency on `self`.
To reduce the burden of manually adding such annotations, we also propose inferring lifetime dependencies in certain common cases without requiring any additional annotations.

> This is a key requirement for the `StorageView` type (previously called `BufferView`) being discussed elsewhere, and is closely related to the proposal for `~Escapable` types.

Reviewer 3: We have named this construct `Span`. Please let's avoid mentioning its deadnames; proposals are forever, and we really need to avoid indefinitely propagating these obsolete names.

```suggestion
This is a key requirement for the `Span` type that is being discussed elsewhere, and is closely related to the proposal for `~Escapable` types.
```
